Adding extension for OPC UA (#1274)
cloudevents/spec: cloudevents/extensions/opcua.md

# OPC UA

> This extension defines the mapping of OPC UA dataset to CloudEvents to allow seamless routing of OPC UA dataset messages via different protocols, it therefor provides an recommendation to map known MANDATORY and OPTIONAL attributes using other extensions as well as defines own extended attributes.

Reviewer: Can you wrap things at 80 columns?

Reviewer: s/therefor/therefore/
s/an recommendation/a recommendation/
s/defines own extended/defines its own extension/

Reviewer: s/MANDATORY/REQUIRED/   I think

Author: Thanks, I reall like that you add the vim replace syntax :)

Reviewer: LOL long live vi !

## Notational Conventions

As with the main [CloudEvents specification](../spec.md), the key words "MUST",
"MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

However, the scope of these key words is limited to when this extension is
used. For example, an attribute being marked as "REQUIRED" does not mean
it needs to be in all CloudEvents, rather it needs to be included only when 
this extension is being used.

## Mapping of REQUIRED Attributes

### id

MUST map to [Network Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.3#Table163) field `MessageId`.

### source

> MUST either map to [Application Description](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v104/docs/7.1) field `applicationUri` of the OPC UA server or to an customer configured identifier like an unified namespace path.

Reviewer: s/to an customer/to a customer/
s/an unified/a unified/

Author: updated

### type

MUST map to [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MessageType`.

## Mapping of OPTIONAL Attributes

### datacontenttype

> SHALL be `application/opcua+json` for OPC UA PubSub JSON payload and MAY be extended by `+gzip` when payload is gzip compressed.

Reviewer: s/SHALL be/MUST be/

Reviewer: Just for consistency with other specs in our repo

Author: updated

### dataschema

OPC UA provides type information as part of PubSub metadata messages, for non OPC UA consumers or when different payload encoding like Avro is used, it is REQUIRED to provide schema information (based on metadata information) in a separate format like [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/specification) or [Avro schema](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/) or others. For those cases the Attribute references the schema and is used for versioning.

### subject

> For metadata and data messages (type one of `ua-metadata`, `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`) MUST map to either [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `DataSetWriterId` or `DataSetWriterName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For metadata and data messages (type one of `ua-metadata`, `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`), `subject` MUST map to either [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `DataSetWriterId` or `DataSetWriterName`.
```

Author: updated

> For event messages (type equals to `ua-event`) SHALL map to [Base Event Type](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part5/v104/docs/6.4.2) field `EventId`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For event messages (type equals to `ua-event`) `subject` MUST map to [Base Event Type](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part5/v104/docs/6.4.2) field `EventId`. 
```

Author: updated

### time

MUST map to [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `Timestamp`.

## Mapping for other extensions

The following well-known extensions attributes are used for data messages and event messages (type one of `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`).

### sequence

Attribute as defined by [sequence extensions](./sequence.md) MUST map to [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `SequenceNumber`.

### traceparent

> Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md) SHALL be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

Reviewer: s/SHALL/MUST/

Author: updated

### tracestate

> Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md) might OPTIONAL be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

Reviewer: s/might OPTIONAL be used/MAY be used/

Author: updated

### recordedtime

> Attribute as defined by [recordedtime extension](./recordedtime.md) SHALL be used to determine the latency between event publisher towards consumer. 

Reviewer: s/SHALL/MUST/

Author: updated

## Attributes

### opcuametadatamajorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata. Contains value from `MajorVersion` of [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MetaDataVersion`. 
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL

>   - Can be omitted if `dataschema` is used

Reviewer: s/Can/MAY/

Reviewer: Actually, it's already OPTIONAL - so do we need this line at all or are you saying that it's require when `dataschema` not used?

Reviewer: same for attributes below

Author: updated

### opcuametadataminorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata. Contains value from `MiniorVersion` of [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MetaDataVersion`.
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL
  - Can be omitted if `dataschema` is used

### opcuastatus

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Defines the overall status of the data set message, maps to [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `Status`.
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL
  - Can be omitted if status is _Good_

## General Constraints

- OPC UA messages MUST use `binary-mode` of CloudEvents.

> - OPC UA PubSub JSON messages MUST be encoded using non-reversible encoding as the decoding information are contained in metadata messages or by schema referenced via `dataschema` attribute.

Author: updated

# OPC UA

> This extension defines the mapping of OPC UA dataset to CloudEvents to allow

Author: Sure, added both OPC UA in general and OPC UA PubSub

event messages (type one of `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`).

### sequence

Attribute as defined by [sequence extensions](./sequence.md) MUST map to [Data
Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `SequenceNumber`.

### traceparent

Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md)
MUST be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

### tracestate

Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md)
MAY be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

### recordedtime

Attribute as defined by [recordedtime extension](./recordedtime.md) MUST be used
to determine the latency between event publisher towards consumer. 

## Attributes

### opcuametadatamajorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata.
Contains value from `MajorVersion` of [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MetaDataVersion`. 
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL

>   - MAY be omitted if `dataschema` is used

Reviewer: As written, we don't need both of these. What is the intent here? REQUIRED unless `dataschema` is used? Or 100% OPTIONAL all the time? or SHOULD be used in general but SHOULD NOT be used when `dataschema` is present?

I have the same questions about the rest of the attributes.

Author: As per OPC UA PubSub spec the `MetaDataVersion` is a structed defined out of 2 elements `MinorVersion` and `MajorVersion`. I avoided adding an JSON object to the header, and splitted it into 2 attributes.

The `MetaDataVersion` is per OPC UA PubSub spec optional (all the time) _but_ this is the field to use, to map between an metadata message version and a data/event message.

`opcuastatus` is optional as long as there is no error while reading the data/events. If there is an error is must be present, if there is no error it may be omitted.

Author: .. and I missed, if the major version is updated, the minor needs to have the same value and after that if there are only compatible additions (new elements added at the end of the payload) only the minor version will be updated. 

But if `dataschema` is used, the versioning would be done via that attribute.

Reviewer: It sounds like it should be:
- OPTIONAL but MUST NOT be present if `dataschema` is used

no?

Not following the `opcustatus` comment though. Do you mean:
- REQUIRED if the event is related to an error, otherwise it is OPTIONAL

?

Author: I used your proposal for metadataversion 👍 

Regarding opcuastatus, in OPC UA PubSub will a client subscribe to value changes or events. There are typically multiple OPC UA nodes subscribed at the same time. The publishing of any node might fail, and the status is the collective status of all subscribed nodes. If everything is good, it can be omitted if one or more have error it must be present

CloudEvents to allow seamless routing of OPC UA dataset messages via different
protocols, it therefore provides a recommendation to map known REQUIRED and
OPTIONAL attributes using other extensions as well as defines its own extension
attributes.

## Notational Conventions

As with the main [CloudEvents specification](../spec.md), the key words "MUST",
"MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

However, the scope of these key words is limited to when this extension is used.
For example, an attribute being marked as "REQUIRED" does not mean it needs to
be in all CloudEvents, rather it needs to be included only when this extension
is being used.

## Mapping of REQUIRED Attributes

### id

MUST map to [Network Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.3#Table163)
field `MessageId`.

### source

MUST either map to [Application
Description](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v104/docs/7.1) field

> `applicationUri` of the OPC UA server or to a customer configured identifier

Reviewer: Will a OPC UA expert know which to use in all cases or do we need to provide guidance?

Author: As the identifier are taken from the specification and the correct parts of the specifications are always linked, that should be fine for a OPC UA expert.

like a unified namespace path.

### type

MUST map to [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `MessageType`.

## Mapping of OPTIONAL Attributes

### datacontenttype

> MUST be `application/json` for OPC UA PubSub JSON payload and MAY be extended by

Reviewer: s/extended by/appended with/

Author: changed

> `+gzip` when payload is gzip compressed.

Reviewer: s/when payload/when the payload/

Author: changed

### dataschema

OPC UA provides type information as part of PubSub metadata messages, for non
OPC UA consumers or when different payload encoding like Avro is used, it is
REQUIRED to provide schema information (based on metadata information) in a
separate format like [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/specification) or
[Avro schema](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/) or others. For

> those cases the Attribute references the schema and is used for versioning.

Reviewer: s/Attribute/attribute/   case of "A"

Author: changed

### subject

For metadata, event and data messages (type one of `ua-metadata`, `ua-keyframe`,
`ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`), `subject` MUST map to either [Data Set Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `DataSetWriterId` or `DataSetWriterName`.

> For event messages (type equals to `ua-event`) `subject` MUST additional contain 

Reviewer: "contain" or "be appended with" ? Just wondering if it MUST come at the end

Author: It must come at the end, I changed to `be appended with`

"/" and [Base Event Type](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part5/v104/docs/6.4.2)
field `EventId`. 

### time

MUST map to [Data Set Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `Timestamp`.

## Mapping for other extensions

The following well-known extensions attributes are used for data messages and
event messages (type one of `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`).

### sequence

Attribute as defined by [sequence extensions](./sequence.md) MUST map to [Data
Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `SequenceNumber`.

### traceparent

Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md)

> MUST be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

Reviewer: The wording here might be a bit awkward - or it could be me :-) Are you trying to say that this attribute MUST be used in all cases or that if people want tracing then this attribute must be used? 

If the former, then perhaps: Attribute as defined by ... MUST be present in all OPC UA enabled CloudEvents to allow for tracing...

if the latter, then perhaps: Attribute as defined by ... MAY be present to allow for tracing...

maybe?  I think the same might apply to recordedtime as well.

### recordedtime

Attribute as defined by [recordedtime extension](./recordedtime.md) MUST be used
to determine the latency between event publisher towards consumer. 

## Attributes

### opcuametadatamajorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata.
Contains value from `MajorVersion` of [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MetaDataVersion`. 
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL but MUST NOT be present if `dataschema` is used

### opcuametadataminorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata.
Contains value from `MiniorVersion` of [Data Set Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `MetaDataVersion`.
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL but MUST NOT be present if `dataschema` is used

### opcuastatus

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Defines the overall status of the data set message, maps to 
[Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `Status`.
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL

>   - MAY be omitted if status is _Good_

Reviewer: Does this mean it's REQUIRED if status is not "good" ?

Author: You are right, it is REQUIRED if status is not "good", I added this as contraint

## General Constraints

- OPC UA messages MUST use `binary-mode` of CloudEvents.
- OPC UA PubSub JSON messages MUST be encoded using non-reversible encoding as
the decoding information is contained in metadata messages or by schema
referenced via `dataschema` attribute.
- Payload of OPC UA PubSub JSON messages MUST NOT contain Network Message Header

> and Data Set Header as those information are mapped into CloudEvents attributes.

Reviewer: s/those information are/that information is/

Author: changed

> - OPC UA PubSub JSON messages MUST only contain one dataset message.

Reviewer: can they contain zero? If yes then perhaps "MUST not contain more than one....". If no, then perhaps "MUST contain exactly one..."

Author: In OPC UA an Network Message can contain multiple dataset messages, as we "promote" dataset and network header fields to CloudEvents attributes, there can only be exactly one contained. Changed to "MUST contain exactly one"

## Examples

### Metadata message

> The metadata message help Cloud applications to understand the semantics and 

Reviewer: s/help/helps/

Author: changed

`+gzip` when the payload is gzip compressed.

### dataschema

OPC UA provides type information as part of PubSub metadata messages, for non
OPC UA consumers or when different payload encoding like Avro is used, it is
REQUIRED to provide schema information (based on metadata information) in a
separate format like [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/specification) or
[Avro schema](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/) or others. For
those cases the attribute references the schema and is used for versioning.

### subject

For metadata, event and data messages (type one of `ua-metadata`, `ua-keyframe`,
`ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`), `subject` MUST map to either [Data Set Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `DataSetWriterId` or `DataSetWriterName`.

For event messages (type equals to `ua-event`) `subject` MUST be appended with 
"/" and [Base Event Type](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part5/v104/docs/6.4.2)
field `EventId`. 

### time

MUST map to [Data Set Message
Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `Timestamp`.

## Mapping for other extensions

> The following well-known extensions attributes are used for data messages and

Reviewer: s/are used/MUST be used/

and then also add:

```
, and MUST NOT be used for event messages of type `ua-metadata`
```

given what you said below. Right?

Author: 👍

event messages (type one of `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`).

### sequence

> Attribute as defined by [sequence extensions](./sequence.md) MUST map to [Data

Reviewer: Is this one required for all OPC UA CloudEventss or is it optional?

Author: > The following well-known extensions attributes are used for data messages and
event messages (type one of `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event`).

All CE attributes defined by other extensions are REQUIRED for type equals `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe` and `ua-event` and SHALL NOT be used for type equals `ua-metadata`.

Author: changed according to your suggestion

Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164)
field `SequenceNumber`.

### traceparent

Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md)

> MUST be present in all OPC UA enabled CloudEvents to allow tracing from event

Author: I think it is now more clear, the other CE extension attributes MUST be used for `ua-keyframe`, `ua-deltaframe`, `ua-event` with the softening, that `tracestate` only MAY be used, as not all traces have state attached.

publisher towards consumer.

### tracestate

Attribute as defined by [distributed-tracing extension](./distributed-tracing.md)
MAY be used to allow tracing from event publisher towards consumer.

### recordedtime

Attribute as defined by [recordedtime extension](./recordedtime.md) MUST be
present in all OPC UA enabled CloudEvents to determine the latency between
event publisher towards consumer.

## Attributes

### opcuametadatamajorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata.
Contains value from `MajorVersion` of [Data Set Message Header](https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/7.2.5.4#Table164) field `MetaDataVersion`. 
- Constraints
  - OPTIONAL but MUST NOT be present if `dataschema` is used

### opcuametadataminorversion

- Type: `Integer`
- Description: Links dataset message to the current version of the metadata.

> Contains value from `MiniorVersion` of [Data Set Message

Reviewer: s/Minior/Minor/   maybe?

Author: changed
